---
title: v0.13.0 Release
date: '2023-06-25'
author: jaime
---

# v0.13.0 Released

Hello again! As promised, this update came a little quicker and is quite a bit
smaller. This update centered around some internal cleanup and a more finalized
API - unfortunately, this means it's a bit light on features and is mostly
focused on breaking changes. Fortunately, there's not too many of them and
migration strategies should be fairly clear. Let's take a look!

## Global Types Changed

This is a small adjustment for users of the global type injection - rather than
having to import the global types into a particular file somewhere in your
project, you can simply add them to your `tsconfig.json` instead!

```json filename=tsconfig.json {4}
{
	"compilerOptions": {
		// ...
		"types": ["thyseus/global"]
	}
}
```

The previous `thyseus/types` import is no longer available.

## Implicit Dependencies Removed

Though nice in theory, implicit dependencies (e.g. `run(mySystem).last()`)
create difficult-to-reason-about dependency graphs. While questions about how
they should work are possible to resolve, they still encourage usage patterns
that are unintuitive because they fundamentally _are_ unintuitive when
considering more than the simplest cases. As a result, **implicit dependencies
have been removed** - explicit dependencies or separate schedules are the
recommended resolution.

## `Commands` & `Entity` Reworked

Allowing `Entity` to insert commands into the world was empowering in many ways,
but came at the cost of making it difficult to determine which systems are
actually capable of creating commands. As an even more unfortunate side-effect,
it also meant that `Entity` could not be used as a substruct by other structs,
as it needed an instance of a particular world's `Commands`. This update sees
some changes to the API of both `Commands` and `Entity` so that they complement
eachother.

### Entity

**The `Entity` component now only contains getters for id/index/generation.** As
an upswing, `Entity` may safely be used in `@struct.substruct`, and some
variation of `Entity.hasComponent()` will make a return in the future!

### Commands

Commands has seen some general improvements and bugfixes with this update. Most
notably, **known no-op commands (e.g., adding components to despawned entities)
are now ignored**, saving on space!

`getEntityById` has been replaced with two new methods - `get()`, which accepts
an instance of the `Entity` component and returns `EntityCommands`, and
`getById()`, which accepts an entity id as before and returns `EntityCommands`.
Similarly, `despawn()` also accepts an `Entity` object - if you only have an id,
you can still use `despawnById()`!

{/* prettier-ignore */}
```ts
function despawnDead(
	query: Query<Entity, With<IsDead>>, 
	commands: Commands
) {
	for (const entity of query) {
		commands.despawn(entity);
	}
}
```

The `get()`, `getById()`, and `spawn()` methods also accept an optional argument
`reuse`, which determines if the returned `EntityCommands` object is reused or
recycled object. To make Thyseus easier to use, `EntityCommands` will _not_ be
reused by default (`false`) and will create unique instances with every call.

The `insertInto`, `insertTypeInto`, `removeFrom` methods have also been
removed - these were of limited utility and required `Commands` to
over-specialize.

## Append-only WorldBuilder

As mentioned in the previous update, `WorldBuilder`s should be treated as
append-only. Despite this, we still allowed access to the internal data of
`WorldBuilder`s. **In v0.13, almost all properties of `WorldBuilder` are
`#private`.** Configuration and the worker URL can still be read, but not
written. Of course, the methods you're used to are still available, and continue
to be the correct way to handle type/system registration!

## Struct Copy/Drop Reworked

The internal mechanics of copying/dropping structs has been reworked - this only
impacts you if you've handwritten structs. `copy()` is a required field on
struct classes, while `drop()` is optional.

## `Memory` flattened

Previously, all binary views over Memory are available on the `Memory.views`
object. `views` has been flattened into the `Memory` object, so typed arrays can
be accessed directly with `Memory.u8`, `Memory.u16`, and so on.

## What's Next?

While this is a small update from the consumer side of things, a lot of cleanup
was done internally to make Thyseus much more extensible and bug-free - it's not
obvious now, but a lot of the work done for v0.13 will lay the necessary
groundwork for exciting future features!

As for the next update: Systems got a lot of love in the v0.12 release, and in a
way Entities got some needed cleanup in this release, too! That just leaves the
"C"... ðŸ‘€
