---
title: Multithreading
---

import { Callout } from ':ui';

# Multithreading

As with any other Javascript, your code runs on a single thread by default.
However, Thyseus empowers you to take advantage of parallelism with a simple
change of configuration. You don't need to worry about scheduling, locks,
creating and communicating between workers, or how to share/propogate data - all
of this is handled internally!

It also provides a number of safety guarantees. Parallelism is enabled by taking
advantage of technologies offered by modern browsers; **there is not and will
never be unsafe code**, such as using `eval` or eval-like constructs, creating
workers from blobs, or any other type of run-time code generation. Your Thyseus
projects are exactly as safe as the code _you_ write, and changing between
single/multithreading does not change this.

**Parallelism won't necessarily automatically improve the performance of your
applications** - in fact, in simpler projects it will likely _harm_ performance.
If and by how much parallelism can help your performance depends on a number of
factors including the number of systems you have & how parallelizable they are,
the number of threads, the parallel executor implementation, the target
environment, and more. Benchmark to see if it helps in your case!

## Compatability with other multithreading solutions

Thyseus's parallelism is not designed to be easily compatible with other
multithreading solutions. While this is an area for future exploration, for now
there are a couple workarounds.

If you would like to use a different multithreading model altogether, you can
still specify that you want Thyseus to use a `SharedArrayBuffer` for your data
in your world configuration:

```ts
import { World } from 'thyseus';

// Thyseus will not construct its own threads, but it will use SharedArrayBuffer
const myWorld = World.new({ threads: 1, useSharedMemory: true });
```

Alternatively, if the functionality of other libraries can be expressed as
Thyseus systems, they should be able to reap the benefits of multithreading as
well.

Finally, [custom executors](/advanced_patterns/custom_executors) can also be
used to change the way systems are executed in parallel according to your own
needs.
