---
title: Entities
---

# Entities

Entities can represent any concrete "thing" in your game world; players,
enemies, items, the game level itself, even parts of the UI - all entities.
Conceptually, an entity is simply an empty container for any number of
**components**, and contains no special properties, data, or meaning on its own.
In practice, an entity is nothing more than an integer id.

Because entities contain no inherent data or meaning, it's not particularly
common to deal with them directly; instead, you'll usually interact with
_components_, the data that belongs to an entity.

## Creating Entities

`World`s take responsibility for creating new entities. We'll cover worlds and
the systems more in the future - for now, we'll write some _very_ simple systems
to show you how to work with entities!

```ts
function spawnEntity(world: World) {
	const entity = world.spawn();
	console.log(entity.id); // -> a number!
}
```

This is a basic system that accepts the `World`. `World.p.spawn()` creates a new
`Entity` object and returns it. You can then add (or remove) components from
that entity!

**Entity creation and changes are not handled immediately**. When you `spawn()`
an entity or change its components, these changes are added to a _queue_, which
is processed later - by default, after a schedule finishes executing. Changes to
entities (including spawning and despawning) are not observable until _after_
this queue of changes has been processed!

## Accessing Entities

Every entity possesses an `Entity` component. This component allows you to
access the entity's id, enqueue changes to it, check what components it has, and
can be queried for in systems (_queries will be covered more later, too!_).

```ts
import { Entity } from 'thyseus';

// This query matches every living entity!
function logAllEntityIds(query: Query<Entity>) {
	for (const entity of query) {
		console.log(entity.id);
	}
}
```

Every Entity's `Entity` component is unique - if you'd like to access that
entity later, you can hold onto the object. It also contains an `isAlive` field
that can be used to check liveliness at any point. Once the entity has been
despawned, `isAlive` will be false.

## Destroying Entities

Of course, not all entities will live forever. You can use the `Entity`
component to queue an entity for destruction:

```ts
function destroyAllEntities(allEntities: Query<Entity>) {
	for (const entity of allEntities) {
		entity.despawn();
	}
}
```
